Blog post: Using Expressions Effectively in Rust (#24)
corrode/corrode.github.io: content/blog/expressions/index.md

    unimplemented!()
}
```

Now the fallback is just a side note, and the main logic is more prominent.

The `Some(path) => path` match arm looks very simple. Almost too simple? We have already used `unwrap_or_else()` once, let's apply it here as well.

```rust
use std::env;
use std::fs::File;
use std::path::PathBuf;

/// Create a configuration file for the application at the given path
fn create_config_file(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let path = config_path.unwrap_or_else(|| {
        env::home_dir()
            .map(|home_dir| home_dir.join(".config/my_app/").to_path_buf())
            .unwrap_or_else(|| PathBuf::from("."))
    });
    Ok(setup_config(&path)?)
}

fn setup_config(path: &PathBuf) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Implementation details omitted
    unimplemented!()
}
```

This code could still be improved, but the main point is to show you how expressions can help you refactor your code without a lot of effort. We avoided repetition simply by thinking in terms of expressions.

## Conclusion

Expressions are very powerful. It takes a bit of practice to get used to them, 

> but once you get acquainted with them, they are a joy to work with.

Reviewer: `to get used to them` and `get acquainted with them` is duplicated.

Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
but once you do, they are a joy to work with.
```

Author: Good point. I changed that. Kept 'acquainted' because I like the word. 😉

"Everything is an expression" is a bit of an exaggeration, but it's a useful mental model while you 
internalize the concept.

Expressions return values, so they can be used in all the places where you would expect a value, like function arguments, assignments, and return statements.

## A Practical Refactoring Example

Here's an abstracted version of some code from a recent real-world project I was asked to refactor, keeping the main idea intact:

```rust
use std::path::{PathBuf};
use std::fs::File;
use std::env;

/// Create a configuration file for the application at the given path
fn create_config_file(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    if let Some(path) = config_path {
        return setup_config(&path);
    } else {
        if let Some(home_dir) = env::home_dir() {
            let config_dir = home_dir.join(".config/my_app/");
            return setup_config(&config_dir);
        } else {
            // Fallback to the current directory
            let current_dir = PathBuf::from(".");
            return setup_config(&current_dir);
        }
    }
}

fn setup_config(path: &PathBuf) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {

>     // Implementation details omitted
>     unimplemented!()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    todo!("demo")
```
maybe?

}
```

There are a few issues with this code, but I want you to focus on the return statements
and the duplicate logic.

## Refactoring with Expressions

The first observation is that we have multiple return statements in the middle of the function.
This can make the code harder to follow and reason about.
Let's refactor the code to have a single return statement at the end of the function.

```rust
use std::env;
use std::fs::File;

> use std::path::PathBuf;

Reviewer 2: Do we have to repeat the use statements and the `setup_config` definition in every block? I'd think once is enough.

Author: See my PR description above. 😉

                PathBuf::from(".")
            }
        }
    };
    Ok(setup_config(&path)?)
}

fn setup_config(path: &PathBuf) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Implementation details omitted
    unimplemented!()
}
```

Better, right? 

The `else` block in the `None` case is just a fallback if all else fails.
It gets way too much attention in the original code.
We can use the `unwrap_or_else` method to make it more concise:

```rust
use std::env;
use std::fs::File;
use std::path::PathBuf;

/// Create a configuration file for the application at the given path
fn create_config_file(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let path = match config_path {
        Some(path) => path,
        None => {
            env::home_dir()
                .map(|home_dir| home_dir.join(".config/my_app/").to_path_buf())
                .unwrap_or_else(|| PathBuf::from("."))
        }
    };
    Ok(setup_config(&path)?)
}

fn setup_config(path: &PathBuf) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Implementation details omitted
    unimplemented!()
}
```

Now the fallback is just a side note, and the main logic is more prominent.

> The `Some(path) => path` match arm looks a bit redundant.
> That's where the `unwrap_or_else` method comes in handy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Some(path) => path` match arm looks very simple. Almost too simple? We have already used `unwrap_or_else()` once, let's apply it here as well.
```

    // which can be assigned to a variable.
    let z = if y > 10 { 1 } else { 0 };
}
```

These examples hardly capture the full flexibility of expressions.
As with many other concepts in Rust, it's hard to internalize expressions without practice.
Let's look at a real-world example.

## A Practical Refactoring Example

Here's an abstracted version of some code from a recent real-world project I was asked to refactor, keeping the main idea intact:

```rust
use std::path::{PathBuf};
use std::fs::File;
use std::env;

/// Create a configuration file for the application at the given path
fn create_config_file(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    if let Some(path) = config_path {
        return setup_config(&path);
    } else {
        if let Some(home_dir) = env::home_dir() {
            let config_dir = home_dir.join(".config/my_app/");
            return setup_config(&config_dir);
        } else {
            // Fallback to the current directory
            let current_dir = PathBuf::from(".");
            return setup_config(&current_dir);
        }
    }
}

fn setup_config(path: &PathBuf) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {

>     todo!("demo")

Reviewer 3: This implementation is different than the one in all the other examples.

Author: I reworked the entire article, so this code went away. 😅

}
```

There are a few issues with this code, but I want you to focus on the return statements
and the duplicate logic.

## Refactoring with Expressions

The first observation is that we have multiple return statements in the middle of the function.
This can make the code harder to follow and reason about.
Let's refactor the code to have a single return statement at the end by assigning the result of the `match` expression to a variable:

```rust
use std::env;
use std::fs::File;
use std::path::PathBuf;

/// Create a configuration file for the application at the given path
fn create_config_file(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> Result<File, Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let config_file = match config_path {
        Some(path) => setup_config(&path),
        None => {
            if let Some(home_dir) = env::home_dir() {
                let config_dir = home_dir.join(".config/my_app/");
                setup_config(&config_dir.to_path_buf())
            } else {
                // Fallback to the current directory
                let current_dir = PathBuf::from(".");
                setup_config(&current_dir)
            }
        }
    };

>     Ok(config_file?)

Reviewer 3: I think this combination of `Ok` and `?` is a bit weird. Especially because it doesn't even convert the type, it seems like useless noise.

I'm not sure what's better, in the context of this article. Writing just `config_file` will result in a Clippy warning, I'm pretty sure. Maybe leave the `?` with the `setup_config` calls, then return `Ok(config_file)` here?

Author: I reworked the entire article, so this code went away. 😅

+++
title = "Effective Use Of Expressions In Rust"
date = 2024-07-31
template = "article.html"
[extra]
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
reviews = [
    { name = "Hanno Braun", url = "https://www.hannobraun.com/" },
    { name = "Thomas Zahner",  url = "https://github.com/thomas-zahner"}
]
resources = [
    "Rust By Example: Expressions &mdash; [doc.rust-lang.org](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/expression.html)",
    "Rust Reference: Expressions &mdash; [doc.rust-lang.org](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions.html)",
    "[Rust, Ruby, and the Art of Implicit Returns &mdash; Earthly blog](https://earthly.dev/blog/single-expression-functions/)"
]
+++

Rust's emphasis on expressions is an underrated aspect of the language.

> {% info(headline="Hold on, what's an expression?") %}

Reviewer 2: No characters talking to one-another? :wink:

> An expression is any construct that evaluates to a value. 

Reviewer 2: Needs a better example from "traditional" languages so readers can try to connect their existing knowledge.

Reviewer 2: I see the examples in the next chapter, which means this whole info block is completely useless.

a) it doesn't explain what an expression is very well
b) it doesn't show examples because that would lead to a repition
c) tonally it's in an uncanny valley between a "standard" blog post and a fasterthanlime / xe iaso explainer post

Author: removed explainer block

In Rust, this includes literals, variables, function calls, blocks, and even control flow statements like `if`, `match`, and `loop`. 

> Rust inherits expressions from its functional roots in the [ML family of languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ML_(programming_language)); they are not so common in languages like C, Java, or Go.

Reviewer 2: This explains what a expression is in Rust, and can lead to confusion for readers coming from "traditional" languages where `if`, `switch`, and `while` are statements. It should be outside of the explainer block.

Author: I fully removed the explainer block; it didn't seem necessary.

{% end %}

> Expressions can easily be dismissed as a minor detail, a nuance in Rust's syntax. Underneath the surface, though, expressions have a deep impact on how the language feels to write. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Expressions can easily be dismissed as a minor detail, a nuance in Rust's syntax. Underneath the surface, though, expressions have a deep impact on the ergonomics of writing Rust.
```

Maybe? :shrug:

Author: I like it. Will add.

Author: done

## Expressions In Rust vs other languages

Languages like Go, C++, Java, TypeScript have expressions, too!
They pale in comparison to Rust, though.

In Go, for example, an `if` statement is... well, a statement and not an expression. This has some surprising side-effects. For example, you can't use an `if` statement in a ternary expression like you would in Rust. 

```go
// This is not valid Go code!
let x = if condition { 1 } else { 2 };
```

Instead, you'd have to write a full-blown `if` statement
along with a slightly unfortunate upfront variable declaration:

```go
var x int
if condition {
	x = 1
} else {
	x = 2
}
```

You get used to that, but you have to memorize when you can use expressions. It also breaks the flow of your code, as you have to introduce a new variable. Switching between statements and expressions requires a mental context switch.

Since `if` is an expression in Rust, using it in a ternary expression is perfectly normal. 

```rust
let x = if condition { 1 } else { 2 };
```

> Also note that in comparison to Go, our variable `x` does not need to be mutable. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention the complete lack of "ternary operators" in Rust compared to other languages.

```php
$x = condition ? 1 : 2;
```

In combination with pattern matching, expressions in Rust are even more powerful:

```rust
let (a, b) = if condition { ("first", true) } else { ("second", false) };
```

Here, the left side of the assignment (a, b) is a pattern that destructures the tuple returned by the if-else expression.

What if you deal with an optional value which gets returned by a function?
That's not a problem. [`match` is an expression](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/match-expr.html), too:

```rust
let x = match foo() {
    Some(x) => x,
    None => return,
};
```

In many other languages, `match` is a statement. 
Python is an example of that and they even [decided against changing that](https://peps.python.org/pep-0622/#make-it-an-expression) for consistency reasons. In Rust, it's just another building block that fits everywhere.

In languages like C, you'd write a switch statement instead:

```c
int x;
switch (foo()) {
    case Some:
        x = foo();
        break;
    case None:
        return;
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Not actually what you'd write because it calls `foo()` twice.

```suggestion
```c
Option f = foo();
int x;
switch (f) {
    case Some:
        x = f.inner;
        break;
    case None:
        return;
}
```
```

Author: C has an `Option` type?

Reviewer 2: Nope, but that hasn't stopped you from writing a mock switch-case for it either. C++ has one if you're curious. https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional

Author: That part is completely rewritten now. I think it's better now.

Rust doesn't have this limitation. You can assign the result of a `match` expression to a variable, just like any other expression.

The Rust `match` expression above might look quite verbose for what it does. Thankfully, there's `let-else`:

```rust
let Some(x) = foo() else { return };
```

Strictly speaking, `let-else` is **not** an expression, but a statement.
That might surprise you, given that I dwelled on expressions so much. In reality, this is an important special case which is
by design, because the "failure" variant of a `let-else` statement must return 
`!` (a.k.a. the "never" type), which represents the type of computations which *never* resolve to any value at all. For example, `return` and `break` are such computations. [^1]

So the `else` branch doesn't yield a value, which is why `let-else` cannot be an expression.

[^1]: You can read up on the details in the [RFC](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3137-let-else.html)

Nevertheless, `let-else` works well in combination with expressions: 

```rust
let result = {
    let Some(x) = foo() else { return };
    x * 2
};
```

> Here, the block returns the value of `x * 2`, which gets assigned to `result`.

Reviewer 2: The example looks contrived, especially the control flow. The point about `let-else` being a statement goes against the broader point of the post, too. The `!` explanation feels misplaced. And no, `let-else` doesn't work well in combination with expressions. That last example is so overly complicated...

```rust
let Some(x) = foo() else { return };
let x = x * 2;
```

Soooo much easier to read and reason about...

Author: I agree. Removing.

Author: This part is gone. Let me know if it's better now.

We hunt for `returns` and semicolons in the middle of the code. These are like "seams" in our program; stop signs, which break the natural flow of data. Almost effortlessly, removing those blockers / stop signs will lead to better code; it's like magic. 

Here's an abstracted version of a function, which returns the correct path to a configuration file.

Imagine, that the following rules apply:

- If a path is provided, create the config file at that path. 
- If no path is provided:
  - If $HOME is set, use `$HOME/.config/my_app/`
  - Use the current directory otherwise

```rust
use std::path::PathBuf;
use std::env;

fn config_file_path(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> PathBuf {
    if let Some(path) = config_path {
        return path;
    } else {
        // Note: don't use `home_dir` in production code as it's deprecated
        // Use the `dirs` or `directories` crates instead
        if let Some(home_dir) = env::home_dir() {
            let config_dir = home_dir.join(".config/my_app/");
            return config_dir;
        } else {
            // Fallback to the current directory
            return PathBuf::from(".");
        }
    }

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use std::path::PathBuf;
use dirs::config_dir;

fn config_file_path(config_path: Option<PathBuf>) -> PathBuf {
    if let Some(path) = config_path {
        return path;
    } else {
        if let Some(home_dir) = config_dir() {
            let config_dir = home_dir.join("my_app");
            return config_dir;
        } else {
            // Fallback to the current directory
            return PathBuf::from(".");
        }
    }
}
```

Just do it...

Reviewer: I agree :+1: 

But don't forget to update the name `home_dir` in

```rust
if let Some(home_dir) = config_dir()
```

Author: change the code.
@thomas-zahner, don't quite get your comment? It's already `if let Some(home_dir) = config_dir()` in Simon's code above?

```rust
let path = env::home_dir()
    .map(|home_dir| home_dir.join(".config/my_app/"))
    .unwrap_or_else(|| PathBuf::from("."));
```

Take a moment to reflect on this: which version do you prefer? Why?
Which version is easier to read and understand? &ndash; not just for you, but for your fellow engineers?

The new version is definitely concise, but it can also reduce readability. The `unwrap_or_else` method ends with the case where `config_path` is `None`, which isn't immediately clear. It feels backwards. The closure code seems like a refinement rather than a distinct next step.

The `.map` and `.unwrap_or_else` combination requires understanding that the first line might fail, forcing the reader to juggle the context and jump between the lines. Depending on your background, this might be okay, but it could be a problem for others and a source of logic bugs.

As with every design decision, there are trade-offs.

An imperative approach, with clear steps, might work just as well.
What if we moved the logic into a separate function?

```rust
let path = get_config_path(config_path);

> ```

Reviewer 2: That logic _was_ in a separate function. It was called `config_file_path()`!?

Reviewer: I think he means only the part of the `config_file_path` function he discussed in the last few sentences. But I was also confused for a moment..

This part:

```rust
let path = env::home_dir()
    .map(|home_dir| home_dir.join(".config/my_app/"))
    .unwrap_or_else(|| PathBuf::from("."));
```

Author: Oh, right. Actually, I did mean only the part you highlighted, Thomas, but it turns out that what I wrote was actually all of `config_file_path`. I'll remove this part and change the wording.

The difference between expressions and statements can easily be dismissed as a minor detail.
Underneath the surface, though, the fact that expressions return values has a profound impact on the ergonomics of a language.

In Rust, most things produce a value: literals, variables, function calls, blocks, and control flow statements like `if`, `match`, and `loop`. 
Even [`&`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#borrow-operators) and [`*`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#the-dereference-operator) are expressions in Rust. 

## Expressions In Rust vs other languages

Rust inherits expressions from its functional roots in the [ML family of languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ML_(programming_language)); they are not so common in other languages. 
Go, C++, Java, and TypeScript have them, but they pale in comparison to Rust.

In Go, for example, an `if` statement is... well, a *statement* and not an expression. This has some surprising side-effects. For example, you can't use `if` statements in a ternary expression like you would in Rust:

```go
// This is not valid Go code!

> let x = if condition { 1 } else { 2 };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var x = if condition { 1 } else { 2 }
```

`let` is rust, this is supposed to be go code

Author: oops, thanks

```

Instead, you'd have to write a full-blown `if` statement
along with a slightly unfortunate upfront variable declaration:

```go
var x int
if condition {
  x = 1
} else {
  x = 2
}
```

Since `if` is an expression in Rust, using it in a ternary expression is perfectly normal. 

```rust
let x = if condition { 1 } else { 2 };
```

That explains the absence of the ternary operator  in Rust (i.e. there is no syntax like `x = condition ? 1 : 2;`).

> It's simply not needed because `if` is equally concise but more versatile. 

Reviewer 2: it's not equally concise, and I fail to see how it is more versatile as a ternary operator. but it is less obtuse and shares the same syntax with the "if statement" simply because it is the same thing.

Author: I rephrased it a bit.
